Last year was a watershed year for South African democracy. It also demonstrated – again – that an independent and vigilant media is a priceless asset for a democracy. We believe that amaBhungane’s work in 2018 reflects our unwavering commitment to safeguarding our democracy and holding those in power to account. #StateCapture: President Cyril Ramaphosa officially established the Zondo Commission of Inquiry, which began in August, to investigate allegations of state capture, corruption and fraud in the public sector including organs of state. The testimony of human rights lawyer Brian Currin in September, was the first time the public was made aware of Currin’s role as an adviser to the two whistleblowers behind the leaked Gupta emails. Currin testified that the whistleblowers, known as Stan and John, remain concerned for their and their families’ safety which is why they remain unable to appear before the inquiry. “I believe the country – the state and the nation – owes a huge debt to these two people. If it had not been for them I wonder if this commission would be sitting today,” Currin said. Money for jam: In a series of articles we exposed the details of a controversial deal, where billions of rands from the Government Employees Pension Fund, which is managed by the state-owned Public Investment Corporation, were pledged to prop up the value of a company before its listing on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange. Scammed: Following an in-depth investigation we laid bare how former Steinhoff CEO Markus Jooste and his inner circle hid an intricate web of opaque deals from the retail firm’s shareholders. Offshore: In a joint investigation with the Mail & Guardian we revealed that the son of then finance minister Nhlanhla Nene, asked thePublic Investment Corporation to finance a huge investment in Mozambique. Siyabonga Nene didn’t get that for himself but the PIC seemingly bent over backwards for his business partner – not least by depositing millions into an offshore account. Landless: For black South Africans, dispossession is not something lost in the mists of history: it is a wound within living memory – and for the majority who are poor, it remains a constant threat. We highlighted the cost to communities whose homes have been demolished to make way for luxury urban real estate developments. Sinking funds, sunk: We published new evidence that revealed a possible R30-million conflict for Geoff Makhubo the chair of the ANC’s powerful Johannesburg region and a prospective mayoral candidate. What the eff? We revealed how before winning a mega-deal from the City of Jo’burg a fleet firm made payments to a company whose account was used for the benefit of Julius Malema and the EFF. All talk no action? Allegedly slow progress to tackle mismanagement and to investigate dodgy contracts at Joburg city’s roads agency fuelled claims against DA mayor Herman Mashaba for ignoring corruption to appease his coalition partners. Still pulling the strings: AmaBhungane published evidence that strongly suggests the Gupta family wants to acquire the crown jewels of what remains of its South African assets from itself, by using an offshore front company to do their bidding.